docs/architecture-reviews/ARCHITECTURE_REVIEW_0.5.0.md, before:

# GOTRS Architecture Review - v0.5.0

> **Note**: This document has been moved to the GOTRS website. Please see the [latest version](/blog/architecture-reviews/2026-01-03-v0-5-0-review) for the current content.

## Archived Content

This historical document is preserved here for reference. The current version is available at: https://gotrs.io/blog/architecture-reviews/2026-01-03-v0-5-0-review

## Review Summary

### Overall Architecture Assessment: **EXCELLENT** ⭐

GOTRS v0.5.0 represents a significant maturation of the platform, completing the Customer Portal vertical slice and substantially enhancing admin module coverage. The architecture maintains its revolutionary foundations while adding production-critical features.

| Metric | v0.4.0 | v0.5.0 | Change |
|--------|--------|--------|--------|
| Admin Modules | ~60% | ~90% | +30% |
| Customer Portal | Partial | Complete | ✅ |
| Test Coverage | Growing | Comprehensive | +++ |
| CI/CD | Legacy | Containerized | ✅ |

## Key Architectural Achievements

### 1. Customer Portal Completion
The customer-facing vertical slice is now fully implemented:

```
Customer Portal Features (v0.5.0)
├── Authentication (JWT with refresh)
├── Ticket Creation (Tiptap rich text)
├── Ticket Viewing (list + detail)
├── Ticket Replies (public/internal)
├── Ticket Closure
├── Service Filtering (customer-user assignment)
├── Default Services (auto-select on create)
├── i18n (EN/DE, 12 templates)
└── Email Threading (RFC-compliant)
```

**Architecture Impact**: Clean separation between agent and customer interfaces, shared service layer with customer-specific view rendering.

### 2. Admin Modules Expansion

| Module | v0.4.0 | v0.5.0 | Tests |
|--------|--------|--------|-------|
| Users | ✅ | ✅ | +++ |
| Groups | ✅ | ✅ | +++ |
| Queues | ✅ | ✅ | +++ |
| Priorities | ✅ | ✅ | +++ |
| States | ✅ | ✅ | +++ |
| Types | ✅ | ✅ | +++ |
| SLA | ✅ | ✅ | UX improved |
| Services | ❌ | ✅ | 31 unit |
| Roles | ❌ | ✅ | +++ |
| Dynamic Fields | ❌ | ✅ | 52+ unit |
| Templates | ❌ | ✅ | 18 unit |
| Customer Users | ✅ | ✅ | +extended |
| Customer Companies | ✅ | ✅ | +extended |
| Customer User Services | ❌ | ✅ | new |

### 3. Self-Registering Handler Architecture

**Revolutionary Change**: Handlers now register via `init()` functions:

```go
// Before: Manual registration in main.go
func init() {
    routing.RegisterHandler("/admin/users", HandleAdminUsers)
}

// After: Self-registration via init()
func init() {
    routing.RegisterHandler(&routing.RouteConfig{
        Path:     "/admin/users",
        Handler:  HandleAdminUsers,
        Template: "pages/admin/users.pongo2",
    })
}
```

**Benefits**:
- Eliminates manual `main.go` maintenance
- Test validates all YAML handlers registered (`yaml_handler_wiring_test.go`)
- Automatic discovery prevents orphaned routes
- Supports dynamic module expansion

### 4. Email Integration Pipeline

Complete RFC-compliant email threading and connector support:

```
┌──────────────────────────────────────────┐
│           Email Pipeline                 │
├──────────────────────────────────────────┤
│  Inbound:                                │
│  ├── POP3 Connector (factory pattern)    │
│  ├── IMAP Connector (v2, TLS support)    │
│  ├── Postmaster Processor                │
│  ├── Ticket Token Filters                │
│  └── External Ticket Rules               │
│                                          │
│  Outbound:                               │
│  ├── RFC Threading (Message-ID, refs)    │
│  ├── BuildEmailMessageWithThreading()    │
│  └── GenerateMessageID()                 │
│                                          │
│  Caching:                                │
│  └── Valkey for poll status              │
└──────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

### 5. CI/CD Pipeline Overhaul

Complete rewrite of GitHub Actions workflows:

| Workflow | Purpose | Tools |
|----------|---------|-------|
| Security | Go security scanning | gosec, govulncheck, Semgrep, Hadolint, GitLeaks |
| Build | Multi-stage Docker | GHCR publishing, SLSA Level 2 |
| Test | Containerized testing | make test, Codecov integration |

**Key Improvements**:
- Removed references to non-existent Dockerfile.dev/frontend
- Container-first approach (Go+HTMX monolith)
- OIDC authentication for Codecov
- VCS stamping for coverage reproducibility

### 6. Dynamic Fields System

7 field types with 52+ unit tests and OTRS-compatible YAML config:

| Field Type | Screen Configuration | Validation |
|------------|---------------------|------------|
| Text | AgentTicketZoom | Alpine.js |
| TextArea | AgentTicketCreate | Server-side |
| Dropdown | AgentTicketPhone | i18n |
| Multiselect | AgentTicketEmail | EN/DE |
| Checkbox | AgentTicketBulk | |
| Date | CustomerTicketMessage | |
| DateTime | CustomerTicketCreate | |

## Architecture Evolution

### v0.4.0 → v0.5.0 Delta

```
v0.4.0 Foundation                          v0.5.0 Production
┌─────────────────────┐                   ┌─────────────────────┐
│ • Basic modules     │                   │ • Full admin suite  │
│ • Partial portal    │        →          │ • Complete portal   │
│ • Legacy CI         │                   │ • Container CI      │
│ • Manual handlers   │                   │ • Self-reg handlers │
│ • Basic email       │                   │ • RFC threading     │
└─────────────────────┘                   └─────────────────────┘
```

### Architectural Patterns Strengthened

1. **Cross-Database Compatibility**
   - `ConvertPlaceholders()` used consistently
   - `InsertWithReturning()` for MySQL/PostgreSQL
   - Test parity (Postgres + MySQL containers)

2. **Handler Pattern Standardization**
   - Dual content-type support (HTMX + JSON)
   - Init-based registration
   - YAML-driven routing consistency

3. **Testing Maturity**
   - 100+ unit tests added (Services, Dynamic Fields, Templates)
   - YAML handler wiring test
   - Integration fixtures parity

## Technology Stack Assessment

| Component | Version | Assessment | Notes |
|-----------|---------|------------|-------|
| Go | 1.24 | ✅ Excellent | Generics support, stable |
| Gin | 1.9.1 | ✅ Excellent | Mature, well-tested |
| Pongo2 | 6.0.0 | ✅ Excellent | Template flexibility |
| Goja | ES5.1 | ⚠️ Consider | Lambda sandbox limited |
| Valkey | 7+ | ✅ Excellent | Redis-compatible cache |
| PostgreSQL | 15+ | ✅ Excellent | Primary database |
| MySQL | 8+ | ✅ Excellent | Full compatibility |
| HTMX | latest | ✅ Excellent | Hypermedia-driven |
| Alpine.js | latest | ✅ Excellent | Lightweight interactivity |

## Critical Patterns

### Database Access Pattern (Enforced)
```go
// All queries use ConvertPlaceholders
rows, err := db.Query(database.ConvertPlaceholders(
    "SELECT * FROM ticket WHERE queue_id = $1", queueID))

// Cross-database INSERT
result, err := database.GetAdapter().InsertWithReturning(
    " INTO sla (name, first_response_time) VALUES ($1, $2) RETURNING id",
    name, firstResponseTime)
```

### Self-Registering Handler
```go
// internal/api/users_init.go
func init() {
    routing.RegisterHandler(&routing.RouteConfig{
        Path:     "/admin/users",
        Method:   "GET",
        Handler:  HandleAdminUsers,
        Template: "pages/admin/users.pongo2",
    })
}
```

### Service Layer Pattern
```go
// Clear separation: Repository → Service → Handler
type TicketService interface {
    Create(ctx context.Context, ticket *Ticket) error
    GetByID(ctx context.Context, id int) (*Ticket, error)
    UpdateStatus(ctx context.Context, id int, statusID int) error
}
```

## Areas for Enhancement

### 1. Observability (Still Pending)
- **Current**: Basic logging
- **Opportunity**: OpenTelemetry integration
- **Impact**: Production debugging, SLO monitoring

### 2. Lambda Functions (Unchanged)
- **Current**: ES5.1 via Goja
- **Opportunity**: v8go for ES2022+ if CGO acceptable
- **Note**: Still industry-first, still sandboxed

### 3. Performance Testing (Gap)
- **Current**: No documented load tests
- **Opportunity**: k6 or wrk integration
- **Impact**: Production capacity planning

### 4. E2E Test Coverage (Growing)
- **Current**: Playwright harness exists
- **Opportunity**: Expand beyond queue preferences
- **Note**: 29MB gotrs-tests image for test runner

## Security Posture

| Aspect | Status | Notes |
|--------|--------|-------|
| Container Security | ✅ Non-root (UID 1000) | SLSA Level 2 |
| Authentication | ✅ JWT + refresh | Token rotation |
| Database Access | ✅ Parameterized | ConvertPlaceholders |
| Input Validation | ✅ Alpine.js + server | Dynamic fields |
| Secret Scanning | ✅ CI integration | GitLeaks, gosec |
| Email Security | ✅ RFC-compliant | Threading, TLS |

## Competitive Position

### vs. v0.4.0
- ✅ Complete customer journey
- ✅ Full admin functionality
- ✅ Production-ready CI/CD
- ✅ Comprehensive testing

### vs. OTRS
- ✅ Modern tech stack (Go vs Perl)
- ✅ Container-native deployment
- ✅ Dynamic modules (zero duplication)
- ✅ Lambda customization (config-driven)
- ✅ HTMX hypermedia (no SPA complexity)

### vs. Modern Ticketing (Zendesk, Freshdesk)
- ✅ Self-hosted option
- ✅ Full customization (lambdas)
- ✅ Open-source transparency
- ✅ No per-user pricing model

## Recommendations

### Immediate (Next 30 Days)
1. **Load testing**: k6 or wrk for customer portal under load
2. **Observability**: OpenTelemetry tracing for hot paths
3. **Performance profiling**: pprof analysis of lambda execution

### Medium Term (3-6 Months)
1. **Lambda expansion**: Add crypto, HTTP utility functions
2. **Visual lambda editor**: Low-code for business logic
3. **E2E pipeline**: Expand Playwright beyond queue preferences

### Long Term (6-12 Months)
1. **Multi-tenant architecture**: Leverage dynamic modules
2. **AI integration**: Lambda-powered extensions
3. **1.0 Release**: Production hardening based on field data

## Architecture Maturity

| Aspect | v0.4.0 | v0.5.0 |
|--------|--------|--------|
| **Code Quality** | Excellent | Excellent |
| **Security** | Excellent | Excellent |
| **Scalability** | Good | Good+ |
| **Maintainability** | Excellent | Excellent |
| **Test Coverage** | Good | Excellent |
| **Documentation** | Excellent | Excellent |
| **Customer Ready** | Partial | Near-complete |
| **Production Ready** | No | Yes |

## Conclusion

GOTRS v0.5.0 achieves **production-ready status** with:
- Complete customer portal vertical slice
- Comprehensive admin module coverage
- Containerized CI/CD with security scanning
- RFC-compliant email integration
- Self-registering handler architecture

The architecture maintains its revolutionary foundation (dynamic modules, lambda functions) while adding the operational maturity required for production deployment. The separation of concerns (repository → service → handler) and cross-database compatibility patterns provide a solid foundation for enterprise deployment.

**Readiness**: ✅ **Production-ready** (subject to organizational readiness factors)

---

*Review conducted: January 3, 2026*
*Reviewer: Architecture Analysis System*
*Version: GOTRS v0.5.0*
*Based on: ARCHITECTURE_REVIEW_2025.md (August 2025)*

Commit message:

chore: rename GOTRS → GoatFlow CE, cleanup dead code, and build improvements
Product rename from GOTRS to GoatFlow CE across the entire codebase:
- Updated all references in docs, templates, configs, CI workflows,
  Helm charts, Dockerfiles, and Go source
- Repository stays goatflow, product name is GoatFlow CE in docs
- Logo updated to use currentColor for theme compatibility

Dead code removal:
- Removed 12 .go.disabled/.go.broken files
- Removed obsolete docs/DEMO.md

Dashboard improvements:
- Migrated Recent Tickets from HTMX handler to plugin widget system
- Plugin badge chip uses theme-aware colours (fixes dark theme contrast)

Build improvements:
- Removed Go build cache mount to prevent stale binary caching
- Added -p for parallel compilation, removed unnecessary -a flag
- Local dev volume mounts via docker-compose.override.yml (gitignored)
- Standardised toolbox image name via TOOLBOX_IMAGE Makefile variable

Theme fixes (90s Vibe dark):
- Fixed --gk-text-muted contrast (WCAG AA compliant)
- Added reminder deck CSS overrides for dark mode

docs/architecture-reviews/ARCHITECTURE_REVIEW_0.5.0.md, after:

# GoatFlow Architecture Review - v0.5.0

> **Note**: This document has been moved to the GoatFlow website. Please see the [latest version](/blog/architecture-reviews/2026-01-03-v0-5-0-review) for the current content.

## Archived Content

This historical document is preserved here for reference. The current version is available at: https://goatflow.io/blog/architecture-reviews/2026-01-03-v0-5-0-review

## Review Summary

### Overall Architecture Assessment: **EXCELLENT** ⭐

GoatFlow v0.5.0 represents a significant maturation of the platform, completing the Customer Portal vertical slice and substantially enhancing admin module coverage. The architecture maintains its revolutionary foundations while adding production-critical features.

| Metric | v0.4.0 | v0.5.0 | Change |
|--------|--------|--------|--------|
| Admin Modules | ~60% | ~90% | +30% |
| Customer Portal | Partial | Complete | ✅ |
| Test Coverage | Growing | Comprehensive | +++ |
| CI/CD | Legacy | Containerized | ✅ |

## Key Architectural Achievements

### 1. Customer Portal Completion
The customer-facing vertical slice is now fully implemented:

```
Customer Portal Features (v0.5.0)
├── Authentication (JWT with refresh)
├── Ticket Creation (Tiptap rich text)
├── Ticket Viewing (list + detail)
├── Ticket Replies (public/internal)
├── Ticket Closure
├── Service Filtering (customer-user assignment)
├── Default Services (auto-select on create)
├── i18n (EN/DE, 12 templates)
└── Email Threading (RFC-compliant)
```

**Architecture Impact**: Clean separation between agent and customer interfaces, shared service layer with customer-specific view rendering.

### 2. Admin Modules Expansion

| Module | v0.4.0 | v0.5.0 | Tests |
|--------|--------|--------|-------|
| Users | ✅ | ✅ | +++ |
| Groups | ✅ | ✅ | +++ |
| Queues | ✅ | ✅ | +++ |
| Priorities | ✅ | ✅ | +++ |
| States | ✅ | ✅ | +++ |
| Types | ✅ | ✅ | +++ |
| SLA | ✅ | ✅ | UX improved |
| Services | ❌ | ✅ | 31 unit |
| Roles | ❌ | ✅ | +++ |
| Dynamic Fields | ❌ | ✅ | 52+ unit |
| Templates | ❌ | ✅ | 18 unit |
| Customer Users | ✅ | ✅ | +extended |
| Customer Companies | ✅ | ✅ | +extended |
| Customer User Services | ❌ | ✅ | new |

### 3. Self-Registering Handler Architecture

**Revolutionary Change**: Handlers now register via `init()` functions:

```go
// Before: Manual registration in main.go
func init() {
    routing.RegisterHandler("/admin/users", HandleAdminUsers)
}

// After: Self-registration via init()
func init() {
    routing.RegisterHandler(&routing.RouteConfig{
        Path:     "/admin/users",
        Handler:  HandleAdminUsers,
        Template: "pages/admin/users.pongo2",
    })
}
```

**Benefits**:
- Eliminates manual `main.go` maintenance
- Test validates all YAML handlers registered (`yaml_handler_wiring_test.go`)
- Automatic discovery prevents orphaned routes
- Supports dynamic module expansion

### 4. Email Integration Pipeline

Complete RFC-compliant email threading and connector support:

```
┌──────────────────────────────────────────┐
│           Email Pipeline                 │
├──────────────────────────────────────────┤
│  Inbound:                                │
│  ├── POP3 Connector (factory pattern)    │
│  ├── IMAP Connector (v2, TLS support)    │
│  ├── Postmaster Processor                │
│  ├── Ticket Token Filters                │
│  └── External Ticket Rules               │
│                                          │
│  Outbound:                               │
│  ├── RFC Threading (Message-ID, refs)    │
│  ├── BuildEmailMessageWithThreading()    │
│  └── GenerateMessageID()                 │
│                                          │
│  Caching:                                │
│  └── Valkey for poll status              │
└──────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

### 5. CI/CD Pipeline Overhaul

Complete rewrite of GitHub Actions workflows:

| Workflow | Purpose | Tools |
|----------|---------|-------|
| Security | Go security scanning | gosec, govulncheck, Semgrep, Hadolint, GitLeaks |
| Build | Multi-stage Docker | GHCR publishing, SLSA Level 2 |
| Test | Containerized testing | make test, Codecov integration |

**Key Improvements**:
- Removed references to non-existent Dockerfile.dev/frontend
- Container-first approach (Go+HTMX monolith)
- OIDC authentication for Codecov
- VCS stamping for coverage reproducibility

### 6. Dynamic Fields System

7 field types with 52+ unit tests and OTRS-compatible YAML config:

| Field Type | Screen Configuration | Validation |
|------------|---------------------|------------|
| Text | AgentTicketZoom | Alpine.js |
| TextArea | AgentTicketCreate | Server-side |
| Dropdown | AgentTicketPhone | i18n |
| Multiselect | AgentTicketEmail | EN/DE |
| Checkbox | AgentTicketBulk | |
| Date | CustomerTicketMessage | |
| DateTime | CustomerTicketCreate | |

## Architecture Evolution

### v0.4.0 → v0.5.0 Delta

```
v0.4.0 Foundation                          v0.5.0 Production
┌─────────────────────┐                   ┌─────────────────────┐
│ • Basic modules     │                   │ • Full admin suite  │
│ • Partial portal    │        →          │ • Complete portal   │
│ • Legacy CI         │                   │ • Container CI      │
│ • Manual handlers   │                   │ • Self-reg handlers │
│ • Basic email       │                   │ • RFC threading     │
└─────────────────────┘                   └─────────────────────┘
```

### Architectural Patterns Strengthened

1. **Cross-Database Compatibility**
   - `ConvertPlaceholders()` used consistently
   - `InsertWithReturning()` for MySQL/PostgreSQL
   - Test parity (Postgres + MySQL containers)

2. **Handler Pattern Standardization**
   - Dual content-type support (HTMX + JSON)
   - Init-based registration
   - YAML-driven routing consistency

3. **Testing Maturity**
   - 100+ unit tests added (Services, Dynamic Fields, Templates)
   - YAML handler wiring test
   - Integration fixtures parity

## Technology Stack Assessment

| Component | Version | Assessment | Notes |
|-----------|---------|------------|-------|
| Go | 1.24 | ✅ Excellent | Generics support, stable |
| Gin | 1.9.1 | ✅ Excellent | Mature, well-tested |
| Pongo2 | 6.0.0 | ✅ Excellent | Template flexibility |
| Goja | ES5.1 | ⚠️ Consider | Lambda sandbox limited |
| Valkey | 7+ | ✅ Excellent | Redis-compatible cache |
| PostgreSQL | 15+ | ✅ Excellent | Primary database |
| MySQL | 8+ | ✅ Excellent | Full compatibility |
| HTMX | latest | ✅ Excellent | Hypermedia-driven |
| Alpine.js | latest | ✅ Excellent | Lightweight interactivity |

## Critical Patterns

### Database Access Pattern (Enforced)
```go
// All queries use ConvertPlaceholders
rows, err := db.Query(database.ConvertPlaceholders(
    "SELECT * FROM ticket WHERE queue_id = $1", queueID))

// Cross-database INSERT
result, err := database.GetAdapter().InsertWithReturning(
    " INTO sla (name, first_response_time) VALUES ($1, $2) RETURNING id",
    name, firstResponseTime)
```

### Self-Registering Handler
```go
// internal/api/users_init.go
func init() {
    routing.RegisterHandler(&routing.RouteConfig{
        Path:     "/admin/users",
        Method:   "GET",
        Handler:  HandleAdminUsers,
        Template: "pages/admin/users.pongo2",
    })
}
```

### Service Layer Pattern
```go
// Clear separation: Repository → Service → Handler
type TicketService interface {
    Create(ctx context.Context, ticket *Ticket) error
    GetByID(ctx context.Context, id int) (*Ticket, error)
    UpdateStatus(ctx context.Context, id int, statusID int) error
}
```

## Areas for Enhancement

### 1. Observability (Still Pending)
- **Current**: Basic logging
- **Opportunity**: OpenTelemetry integration
- **Impact**: Production debugging, SLO monitoring

### 2. Lambda Functions (Unchanged)
- **Current**: ES5.1 via Goja
- **Opportunity**: v8go for ES2022+ if CGO acceptable
- **Note**: Still industry-first, still sandboxed

### 3. Performance Testing (Gap)
- **Current**: No documented load tests
- **Opportunity**: k6 or wrk integration
- **Impact**: Production capacity planning

### 4. E2E Test Coverage (Growing)
- **Current**: Playwright harness exists
- **Opportunity**: Expand beyond queue preferences
- **Note**: 29MB goatflow-tests image for test runner

## Security Posture

| Aspect | Status | Notes |
|--------|--------|-------|
| Container Security | ✅ Non-root (UID 1000) | SLSA Level 2 |
| Authentication | ✅ JWT + refresh | Token rotation |
| Database Access | ✅ Parameterized | ConvertPlaceholders |
| Input Validation | ✅ Alpine.js + server | Dynamic fields |
| Secret Scanning | ✅ CI integration | GitLeaks, gosec |
| Email Security | ✅ RFC-compliant | Threading, TLS |

## Competitive Position

### vs. v0.4.0
- ✅ Complete customer journey
- ✅ Full admin functionality
- ✅ Production-ready CI/CD
- ✅ Comprehensive testing

### vs. OTRS
- ✅ Modern tech stack (Go vs Perl)
- ✅ Container-native deployment
- ✅ Dynamic modules (zero duplication)
- ✅ Lambda customization (config-driven)
- ✅ HTMX hypermedia (no SPA complexity)

### vs. Modern Ticketing (Zendesk, Freshdesk)
- ✅ Self-hosted option
- ✅ Full customization (lambdas)
- ✅ Open-source transparency
- ✅ No per-user pricing model

## Recommendations

### Immediate (Next 30 Days)
1. **Load testing**: k6 or wrk for customer portal under load
2. **Observability**: OpenTelemetry tracing for hot paths
3. **Performance profiling**: pprof analysis of lambda execution

### Medium Term (3-6 Months)
1. **Lambda expansion**: Add crypto, HTTP utility functions
2. **Visual lambda editor**: Low-code for business logic
3. **E2E pipeline**: Expand Playwright beyond queue preferences

### Long Term (6-12 Months)
1. **Multi-tenant architecture**: Leverage dynamic modules
2. **AI integration**: Lambda-powered extensions
3. **1.0 Release**: Production hardening based on field data

## Architecture Maturity

| Aspect | v0.4.0 | v0.5.0 |
|--------|--------|--------|
| **Code Quality** | Excellent | Excellent |
| **Security** | Excellent | Excellent |
| **Scalability** | Good | Good+ |
| **Maintainability** | Excellent | Excellent |
| **Test Coverage** | Good | Excellent |
| **Documentation** | Excellent | Excellent |
| **Customer Ready** | Partial | Near-complete |
| **Production Ready** | No | Yes |

## Conclusion

GoatFlow v0.5.0 achieves **production-ready status** with:
- Complete customer portal vertical slice
- Comprehensive admin module coverage
- Containerized CI/CD with security scanning
- RFC-compliant email integration
- Self-registering handler architecture

The architecture maintains its revolutionary foundation (dynamic modules, lambda functions) while adding the operational maturity required for production deployment. The separation of concerns (repository → service → handler) and cross-database compatibility patterns provide a solid foundation for enterprise deployment.

**Readiness**: ✅ **Production-ready** (subject to organizational readiness factors)

---

*Review conducted: January 3, 2026*
*Reviewer: Architecture Analysis System*
*Version: GoatFlow v0.5.0*
*Based on: ARCHITECTURE_REVIEW_2025.md (August 2025)*
