docs/admin-guide/README.md, before:

# GOTRS Administrator Guide

## Coming Soon

Comprehensive documentation for GOTRS system administrators.

## Planned Content

### Installation & Setup
- System requirements
- Installation methods
- Initial configuration
- Database setup
- Email configuration
- Security hardening

### User Management
- Creating and managing users
- Roles and permissions
- Groups configuration
- Customer organizations
- Access control lists
- Single Sign-On (SSO) setup

### System Configuration
- General settings
- Queue management
- SLA configuration
- Service catalog
- Custom fields
- Templates

### Workflow & Automation
- Workflow designer
- Triggers and conditions
- Automated actions
- Escalation rules
- Business hours
- Holiday calendars

### Email Integration
- SMTP/IMAP configuration
- Email fetching
- Auto-responses
- Email templates
- Routing rules

### Maintenance
- Backup and restore
- System updates
- Performance tuning
- Database maintenance
- Log management
- Monitoring

### Security
- Security settings
- Audit logs
- Compliance configuration
- Data retention
- Encryption settings

### Reporting
- Built-in reports
- Custom report creation
- Dashboard configuration
- Data export

### Integrations
- API configuration
- Webhook setup
- Third-party integrations
- LDAP/Active Directory
- OAuth providers

### Troubleshooting
- Common issues
- Diagnostic tools
- Performance issues
- Error messages
- Support resources

## Quick Reference

### Default Paths
- Configuration: `/etc/gotrs/`
- Logs: `/var/log/gotrs/`
- Data: `/var/lib/gotrs/`
- Attachments: `/var/lib/gotrs/attachments/`

### Important Commands
```bash
# Check system status
gotrs-cli status

# Run database migrations
gotrs-cli migrate up

# Create admin user
gotrs-cli user create --admin

# Backup database
gotrs-cli backup create
```

## See Also

- [Security Guide](../SECURITY.md)
- [Migration Guide](../MIGRATION.md)
- [Deployment Guides](../deployment/)

---

*Full administrator documentation coming soon. For security information, see [SECURITY.md](../SECURITY.md)*

Commit message:

Implement SMTP email notification system with task scheduling and queue management
- Added SMTP email provider for sending emails with support for HTML content and authentication.
- Created tests for SMTP provider to validate email sending functionality and configuration.
- Developed a task runner to manage scheduled tasks, including email queue processing.
- Implemented email queue task to process and send emails from the database with retry logic.
- Added a web interface for managing the email queue, displaying statistics and allowing actions on individual emails.
- Included notification system for user feedback on email queue actions.

docs/admin-guide/README.md, after:

# GOTRS Administrator Guide

## Coming Soon

Comprehensive documentation for GOTRS system administrators.

## Planned Content

### Installation & Setup
- System requirements
- Installation methods
- Initial configuration
- Database setup
- Email configuration
- Security hardening

### User Management
- Creating and managing users
- Roles and permissions
- Groups configuration
- Customer organizations
- Access control lists
- Single Sign-On (SSO) setup

### System Configuration
- General settings
- Queue management
- SLA configuration
- Service catalog
- Custom fields
- Templates

### Workflow & Automation
- Workflow designer
- Triggers and conditions
- Automated actions
- Escalation rules
- Business hours
- Holiday calendars

### Email Integration
- SMTP/IMAP configuration
- Email fetching with RFC-compliant threading (Message-ID, In-Reply-To, References)
- Auto-responses
- Email templates
- Routing rules

### Maintenance
- Backup and restore
- System updates
- Performance tuning
- Database maintenance
- Log management
- Monitoring

### Security
- Security settings
- Audit logs
- Compliance configuration
- Data retention
- Encryption settings

### Reporting
- Built-in reports
- Custom report creation
- Dashboard configuration
- Data export

### Integrations
- API configuration
- Webhook setup
- Third-party integrations
- LDAP/Active Directory
- OAuth providers

### Troubleshooting
- Common issues
- Diagnostic tools
- Performance issues
- Error messages
- Support resources

## Quick Reference

### Default Paths
- Configuration: `/etc/gotrs/`
- Logs: `/var/log/gotrs/`
- Data: `/var/lib/gotrs/`
- Attachments: `/var/lib/gotrs/attachments/`

### Important Commands
```bash
# Check system status
gotrs-cli status

# Run database migrations
gotrs-cli migrate up

# Create admin user
gotrs-cli user create --admin

# Backup database
gotrs-cli backup create
```

## See Also

- [Security Guide](../SECURITY.md)
- [Migration Guide](../MIGRATION.md)
- [Deployment Guides](../deployment/)

---

*Full administrator documentation coming soon. For security information, see [SECURITY.md](../SECURITY.md)*
