CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

# Contributing to GOTRS

Engineering assistants: See [docs/development/AGENT_GUIDE.md](docs/development/AGENT_GUIDE.md) for the canonical operating manual and workflow.

## Coming Soon

Thank you for your interest in contributing to GOTRS! 

This document will contain:
- Code of Conduct
- Development setup instructions
- Coding standards and style guide
- Pull request process
- Issue reporting guidelines
- Testing requirements
- Documentation standards
- CLA (Contributor License Agreement) information

For now, please check:
- [README.md](README.md) for project overview
- [ROADMAP.md](ROADMAP.md) for development priorities
- [docs/development/MVP.md](docs/development/MVP.md) for current development focus

## Quick Start

While we prepare comprehensive contribution guidelines, here are the basics:

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch
3. Make your changes
4. Ensure tests pass
5. Submit a pull request

## Contact

- GitHub Issues: [Report bugs or request features]
- Discord: [Join our community]
- Email: contribute@gotrs.io

---

*This document is under development. Check back soon for complete contribution guidelines.*

## Temporary Critical Standards

- Database access: use `database.ConvertPlaceholders` for every SQL string (no exceptions).
- **Dynamic SQL**: use `database.QueryBuilder` for any dynamic WHERE/column construction (mandatory for gosec compliance).
- No ORM: use `database/sql` with small repositories.
- Keep SQL in repositories, not handlers.
- Templating: Pongo2 only. Do not use Go's `html/template`. Render user-facing views via Pongo2 with `layouts/base.pongo2` and proper context (`User`, `ActivePage`).
- Routing: All routes defined in YAML under `routes/*.yaml` using the YAML router. Do not register routes directly in Go code.
- Tests: add/update tests for any DB-affecting change; run `make test`.

## Go Performance Standards

### Preallocate Slices (Required)
When building a slice in a loop where the size is known:

```go
// ❌ Wrong - causes multiple reallocations
var results []Item
for _, src := range items {
    results = append(results, transform(src))
}

// ✅ Correct - single allocation
results := make([]Item, 0, len(items))
for _, src := range items {
    results = append(results, transform(src))
}
```

### Use strings.Builder for Concatenation
```go
// ❌ Wrong - O(n²) allocations
var result string
for _, s := range parts {
    result += s
}

// ✅ Correct - O(n)
var b strings.Builder
for _, s := range parts {
    b.WriteString(s)
}
result := b.String()
```

Run `make toolbox-exec ARGS="golangci-lint run"` to catch these with the `prealloc` linter.

Commit message:

chore: rename GOTRS → GoatFlow CE, cleanup dead code, and build improvements
Product rename from GOTRS to GoatFlow CE across the entire codebase:
- Updated all references in docs, templates, configs, CI workflows,
  Helm charts, Dockerfiles, and Go source
- Repository stays goatflow, product name is GoatFlow CE in docs
- Logo updated to use currentColor for theme compatibility

Dead code removal:
- Removed 12 .go.disabled/.go.broken files
- Removed obsolete docs/DEMO.md

Dashboard improvements:
- Migrated Recent Tickets from HTMX handler to plugin widget system
- Plugin badge chip uses theme-aware colours (fixes dark theme contrast)

Build improvements:
- Removed Go build cache mount to prevent stale binary caching
- Added -p for parallel compilation, removed unnecessary -a flag
- Local dev volume mounts via docker-compose.override.yml (gitignored)
- Standardised toolbox image name via TOOLBOX_IMAGE Makefile variable

Theme fixes (90s Vibe dark):
- Fixed --gk-text-muted contrast (WCAG AA compliant)
- Added reminder deck CSS overrides for dark mode

CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

# Contributing to GoatFlow

Engineering assistants: See [docs/development/AGENT_GUIDE.md](docs/development/AGENT_GUIDE.md) for the canonical operating manual and workflow.

## Coming Soon

Thank you for your interest in contributing to GoatFlow! 

This document will contain:
- Code of Conduct
- Development setup instructions
- Coding standards and style guide
- Pull request process
- Issue reporting guidelines
- Testing requirements
- Documentation standards
- CLA (Contributor License Agreement) information

For now, please check:
- [README.md](README.md) for project overview
- [ROADMAP.md](ROADMAP.md) for development priorities
- [docs/development/MVP.md](docs/development/MVP.md) for current development focus

## Quick Start

While we prepare comprehensive contribution guidelines, here are the basics:

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch
3. Make your changes
4. Ensure tests pass
5. Submit a pull request

## Contact

- GitHub Issues: [Report bugs or request features]
- Discord: [Join our community]
- Email: hello@goatflow.io

---

*This document is under development. Check back soon for complete contribution guidelines.*

## Temporary Critical Standards

- Database access: use `database.ConvertPlaceholders` for every SQL string (no exceptions).
- **Dynamic SQL**: use `database.QueryBuilder` for any dynamic WHERE/column construction (mandatory for gosec compliance).
- No ORM: use `database/sql` with small repositories.
- Keep SQL in repositories, not handlers.
- Templating: Pongo2 only. Do not use Go's `html/template`. Render user-facing views via Pongo2 with `layouts/base.pongo2` and proper context (`User`, `ActivePage`).
- Routing: All routes defined in YAML under `routes/*.yaml` using the YAML router. Do not register routes directly in Go code.
- Tests: add/update tests for any DB-affecting change; run `make test`.

## Go Performance Standards

### Preallocate Slices (Required)
When building a slice in a loop where the size is known:

```go
// ❌ Wrong - causes multiple reallocations
var results []Item
for _, src := range items {
    results = append(results, transform(src))
}

// ✅ Correct - single allocation
results := make([]Item, 0, len(items))
for _, src := range items {
    results = append(results, transform(src))
}
```

### Use strings.Builder for Concatenation
```go
// ❌ Wrong - O(n²) allocations
var result string
for _, s := range parts {
    result += s
}

// ✅ Correct - O(n)
var b strings.Builder
for _, s := range parts {
    b.WriteString(s)
}
result := b.String()
```

Run `make toolbox-exec ARGS="golangci-lint run"` to catch these with the `prealloc` linter.
