docs/OTRS_MIGRATION_GUIDE.md, before:

# GOTRS OTRS Migration Guide

## Overview

GOTRS provides comprehensive compatibility with OTRS systems through the `gotrs-migrate` tool, enabling seamless migration of production OTRS databases to GOTRS. This guide documents the complete migration process, capabilities, and results.

## Migration Tool: `gotrs-migrate`

### Installation

```bash
# Build the migration tool
make toolbox-exec ARGS="go build -o bin/gotrs-migrate ./cmd/gotrs-migrate"
```

### Usage

```bash
# Analyze OTRS SQL dump
./bin/gotrs-migrate -cmd=analyze -sql=otrs_dump.sql

# Import OTRS data (dry run)
./bin/gotrs-migrate -cmd=import -sql=otrs_dump.sql -db=postgres://user:pass@localhost/gotrs -dry-run

# Import OTRS data
./bin/gotrs-migrate -cmd=import -sql=otrs_dump.sql -db=postgres://user:pass@localhost/gotrs

# Validate imported data
./bin/gotrs-migrate -cmd=validate -db=postgres://user:pass@localhost/gotrs
```

## Supported OTRS Features

### ✅ Core Ticketing System (100% Compatible)
- **Tickets**: All ticket types, states, priorities, and metadata
- **Articles**: Email content, attachments, and communication history  
- **Customers**: Customer users, companies, and relationships
- **Agents**: Users, groups, permissions, and role assignments
- **Queues**: Queue configuration and routing rules

### ✅ Advanced Features (Comprehensive Support)
- **System Configuration**: 1,481+ OTRS configuration settings imported
- **Dynamic Fields**: Custom field definitions and metadata
- **Time Accounting**: Time tracking entries and billing data
- **Templates**: Standard response templates and attachments
- **Auto Responses**: Automated email response system
- **Notifications**: Event-based notification system
- **Communication Logs**: Complete audit trail of communications
- **Search Indexing**: Full-text search capabilities
- **Link System**: Object relationships and dependencies

### ✅ Security & Permissions
- **Group Permissions**: User-to-group assignments with granular permissions
- **Customer Permissions**: Customer-to-group access control
- **Role-Based Access**: Hierarchical permission system
- **System Addresses**: Email configuration and routing

## Schema Compatibility

### OTRS Table Coverage

**Total OTRS Tables**: 116  
**Tables with Data**: 61  
**GOTRS Compatible Tables**: 68  
**Successfully Imported**: 59 tables

### Key Schema Alignments

#### Ticket System
```sql
-- OTRS uses 'type_id', GOTRS aligned automatically (COMPLETED)
-- Migration applied: ticket_type_id → type_id
-- All code references updated to use type_id column
```

#### Auto-Increment ID Handling
The migration tool automatically handles OTRS explicit IDs vs PostgreSQL auto-generated IDs:
- Removes explicit ID values from OTRS INSERT statements
- Maps column names correctly for 20+ table types
- Preserves all data relationships and foreign keys

#### Multi-Value INSERT Parsing
Handles complex OTRS INSERT statements:
```sql
-- OTRS format (8 tickets in one statement)
INSERT INTO ticket VALUES (1,'...'), (2,'...'), (3,'...');

-- Converted to individual PostgreSQL statements
INSERT INTO ticket (tn, title, ...) VALUES ('...', '...', ...);
INSERT INTO ticket (tn, title, ...) VALUES ('...', '...', ...);
```

## Migration Results (Real Production Data)

### Core Data Successfully Imported
- **8 tickets** with complete history
- **11 articles** with complete content
- **2 customer users** with profiles  
- **1 customer company** with configuration
- **4 queues** with routing configuration
- **4 groups** with permission matrices

### Advanced Features Successfully Imported
- **1,481 system configuration entries** (complete OTRS config)
- **339 communication log entries** (audit trail)
- **46 communication objects** (message tracking)
- **43 search index entries** (full-text search)
- **4 communication channels** (email, phone, web)
- **4 time accounting entries** (billing data)
- **6 error logs** (delivery failures)
- **3 lookup tables** (object references)
- **2 dynamic fields** (custom field definitions)
- **2 deployment configurations** (system states)
- **2 system modifications** (customizations)

### Data Integrity Verified
- ✅ **Zero tickets without articles**
- ✅ **Zero orphaned customer records**
- ✅ **All foreign key relationships preserved**
- ✅ **Complete audit trail maintained**
- ✅ **No data loss or corruption**

## Confidential Data Handling

### Security Measures
- **Database-only storage**: No confidential data written to files
- **Git exclusion**: OTRS dumps never committed to version control
- **Memory safety**: Large dumps processed in streams
- **Access control**: Database permissions limit access scope

### Real-World Validation
Successfully imported production OTRS data including:
- **Customer tickets**: Various support requests and incidents
- **Complete customer database**: All user accounts and permissions
- **Full system configuration**: Production OTRS settings and customizations

## Performance Characteristics

### Import Statistics
- **Total SQL statements processed**: 1,951
- **Successfully imported statements**: 66
- **Processing speed**: Large dumps (4,000+ lines) in seconds
- **Memory usage**: Efficient streaming for large datasets
- **Error recovery**: Continues processing despite individual failures

### Optimization Features
- **Batch processing**: Groups related operations
- **Relationship mapping**: Maintains referential integrity
- **Conflict resolution**: Handles duplicate data gracefully
- **Progress reporting**: Real-time import status

## Known Limitations

### Minor Compatibility Gaps
- **Binary data encoding**: Some attachment formats need conversion
- **Specialized modules**: Process management, calendar system not yet supported
- **Custom modifications**: Site-specific OTRS customizations require manual review

### Workarounds Available
- **Missing tables**: Can be added via migration files
- **Data type mismatches**: Tool provides automatic conversion
- **Encoding issues**: UTF-8 conversion handles most cases

## Migration Best Practices

### Pre-Migration Checklist
1. **Backup existing GOTRS database**
2. **Verify OTRS dump integrity** with analyze command
3. **Test with dry-run first** to identify potential issues
4. **Review confidentiality requirements** for sensitive data

### Migration Process
```bash
# 1. Clean database setup
make db-reset

# 2. Analyze the OTRS dump
./bin/gotrs-migrate -cmd=analyze -sql=otrs_production.sql

# 3. Test import (dry run)
./bin/gotrs-migrate -cmd=import -sql=otrs_production.sql -db="$DB_URL" -dry-run

# 4. Perform actual import
./bin/gotrs-migrate -cmd=import -sql=otrs_production.sql -db="$DB_URL"

# 5. Validate results
./bin/gotrs-migrate -cmd=validate -db="$DB_URL"
```

### Post-Migration Validation
1. **Core functionality**: Verify ticket creation, customer access, agent workflows
2. **Data integrity**: Check relationship consistency and foreign keys
3. **Advanced features**: Test system configuration, notifications, templates
4. **Security**: Verify user permissions and access controls

## Success Metrics

### Compatibility Achievement
- **✅ 100% core OTRS functionality** preserved
- **✅ 95%+ advanced feature compatibility** achieved
- **✅ Zero data loss** during migration
- **✅ Complete audit trail** maintained
- **✅ Production-grade reliability** demonstrated

### Technical Validation
- **✅ Real-world testing** with production OTRS database
- **✅ Confidential data handling** proven secure
- **✅ Large dataset performance** verified efficient
- **✅ Error handling robustness** confirmed resilient
- **✅ Schema evolution** demonstrated flexible

## Conclusion

The GOTRS OTRS migration system provides enterprise-grade compatibility with existing OTRS installations, enabling organizations to migrate with confidence. The tool has been validated with real production data including confidential customer information, demonstrating both technical capability and security compliance.

**Migration confidence level: 95%+**  
**Recommended for production use: ✅ Yes**  
**Data security validated: ✅ Confirmed**  
**OTRS compatibility claims: ✅ Verified**

For technical support or migration assistance, refer to the GOTRS documentation or contact the development team.

## Mounting an Existing OTRS Filesystem (Attachments)

GOTRS now uses the OTRS filesystem layout for attachments:

- var/article/YYYY/MM/DD/<TicketID>/<ArticleID>/<filename>

This means you can bind-mount your existing OTRS attachment store and GOTRS will read old attachments and write new ones in the same structure.

### Recommended docker-compose configuration

In `docker-compose.yml` for the backend service:

1) Keep a base storage mount for GOTRS caches/thumbs

- ./storage:/app/storage:Z

2) Mount OTRS article tree at the correct path

- /opt/znuny/var/article:/app/storage/var/article:Z

3) Ensure runtime environment points to storage root

- STORAGE_PATH=/app/storage

Example snippet:

```yaml
services:
	backend:
		environment:
			STORAGE_PATH: /app/storage
		volumes:
			- ./storage:/app/storage:Z
			- /opt/znuny/var/article:/app/storage/var/article:Z
```

### Notes

- Read-only option: Use `:ro,Z` on the OTRS mount if you want GOTRS to read from OTRS but not write to it.
- Full write compatibility: Use `:Z` to allow GOTRS to write new attachments in OTRS format and location.
- Permissions: Containers run as UID 1000; ensure the host path allows read/write as needed. On SELinux systems, `:Z` is required (already included above).
- Alternate approach: If your host folder already contains `var/article` at its root, you can mount that folder directly at `/app/storage` instead of a nested mount. Be aware this will also store GOTRS thumbnails under that host folder.

Commit message:

chore: rename GOTRS → GoatFlow CE, cleanup dead code, and build improvements
Product rename from GOTRS to GoatFlow CE across the entire codebase:
- Updated all references in docs, templates, configs, CI workflows,
  Helm charts, Dockerfiles, and Go source
- Repository stays goatflow, product name is GoatFlow CE in docs
- Logo updated to use currentColor for theme compatibility

Dead code removal:
- Removed 12 .go.disabled/.go.broken files
- Removed obsolete docs/DEMO.md

Dashboard improvements:
- Migrated Recent Tickets from HTMX handler to plugin widget system
- Plugin badge chip uses theme-aware colours (fixes dark theme contrast)

Build improvements:
- Removed Go build cache mount to prevent stale binary caching
- Added -p for parallel compilation, removed unnecessary -a flag
- Local dev volume mounts via docker-compose.override.yml (gitignored)
- Standardised toolbox image name via TOOLBOX_IMAGE Makefile variable

Theme fixes (90s Vibe dark):
- Fixed --gk-text-muted contrast (WCAG AA compliant)
- Added reminder deck CSS overrides for dark mode

docs/OTRS_MIGRATION_GUIDE.md, after:

# GoatFlow OTRS Migration Guide

## Overview

GoatFlow provides comprehensive compatibility with OTRS systems through the `goatflow-migrate` tool, enabling seamless migration of production OTRS databases to GoatFlow. This guide documents the complete migration process, capabilities, and results.

## Migration Tool: `goatflow-migrate`

### Installation

```bash
# Build the migration tool
make toolbox-exec ARGS="go build -o bin/goatflow-migrate ./cmd/goatflow-migrate"
```

### Usage

```bash
# Analyze OTRS SQL dump
./bin/goatflow-migrate -cmd=analyze -sql=otrs_dump.sql

# Import OTRS data (dry run)
./bin/goatflow-migrate -cmd=import -sql=otrs_dump.sql -db=postgres://user:pass@localhost/goatflow -dry-run

# Import OTRS data
./bin/goatflow-migrate -cmd=import -sql=otrs_dump.sql -db=postgres://user:pass@localhost/goatflow

# Validate imported data
./bin/goatflow-migrate -cmd=validate -db=postgres://user:pass@localhost/goatflow
```

## Supported OTRS Features

### ✅ Core Ticketing System (100% Compatible)
- **Tickets**: All ticket types, states, priorities, and metadata
- **Articles**: Email content, attachments, and communication history  
- **Customers**: Customer users, companies, and relationships
- **Agents**: Users, groups, permissions, and role assignments
- **Queues**: Queue configuration and routing rules

### ✅ Advanced Features (Comprehensive Support)
- **System Configuration**: 1,481+ OTRS configuration settings imported
- **Dynamic Fields**: Custom field definitions and metadata
- **Time Accounting**: Time tracking entries and billing data
- **Templates**: Standard response templates and attachments
- **Auto Responses**: Automated email response system
- **Notifications**: Event-based notification system
- **Communication Logs**: Complete audit trail of communications
- **Search Indexing**: Full-text search capabilities
- **Link System**: Object relationships and dependencies

### ✅ Security & Permissions
- **Group Permissions**: User-to-group assignments with granular permissions
- **Customer Permissions**: Customer-to-group access control
- **Role-Based Access**: Hierarchical permission system
- **System Addresses**: Email configuration and routing

## Schema Compatibility

### OTRS Table Coverage

**Total OTRS Tables**: 116  
**Tables with Data**: 61  
**GoatFlow Compatible Tables**: 68  
**Successfully Imported**: 59 tables

### Key Schema Alignments

#### Ticket System
```sql
-- OTRS uses 'type_id', GoatFlow aligned automatically (COMPLETED)
-- Migration applied: ticket_type_id → type_id
-- All code references updated to use type_id column
```

#### Auto-Increment ID Handling
The migration tool automatically handles OTRS explicit IDs vs PostgreSQL auto-generated IDs:
- Removes explicit ID values from OTRS INSERT statements
- Maps column names correctly for 20+ table types
- Preserves all data relationships and foreign keys

#### Multi-Value INSERT Parsing
Handles complex OTRS INSERT statements:
```sql
-- OTRS format (8 tickets in one statement)
INSERT INTO ticket VALUES (1,'...'), (2,'...'), (3,'...');

-- Converted to individual PostgreSQL statements
INSERT INTO ticket (tn, title, ...) VALUES ('...', '...', ...);
INSERT INTO ticket (tn, title, ...) VALUES ('...', '...', ...);
```

## Migration Results (Real Production Data)

### Core Data Successfully Imported
- **8 tickets** with complete history
- **11 articles** with complete content
- **2 customer users** with profiles  
- **1 customer company** with configuration
- **4 queues** with routing configuration
- **4 groups** with permission matrices

### Advanced Features Successfully Imported
- **1,481 system configuration entries** (complete OTRS config)
- **339 communication log entries** (audit trail)
- **46 communication objects** (message tracking)
- **43 search index entries** (full-text search)
- **4 communication channels** (email, phone, web)
- **4 time accounting entries** (billing data)
- **6 error logs** (delivery failures)
- **3 lookup tables** (object references)
- **2 dynamic fields** (custom field definitions)
- **2 deployment configurations** (system states)
- **2 system modifications** (customizations)

### Data Integrity Verified
- ✅ **Zero tickets without articles**
- ✅ **Zero orphaned customer records**
- ✅ **All foreign key relationships preserved**
- ✅ **Complete audit trail maintained**
- ✅ **No data loss or corruption**

## Confidential Data Handling

### Security Measures
- **Database-only storage**: No confidential data written to files
- **Git exclusion**: OTRS dumps never committed to version control
- **Memory safety**: Large dumps processed in streams
- **Access control**: Database permissions limit access scope

### Real-World Validation
Successfully imported production OTRS data including:
- **Customer tickets**: Various support requests and incidents
- **Complete customer database**: All user accounts and permissions
- **Full system configuration**: Production OTRS settings and customizations

## Performance Characteristics

### Import Statistics
- **Total SQL statements processed**: 1,951
- **Successfully imported statements**: 66
- **Processing speed**: Large dumps (4,000+ lines) in seconds
- **Memory usage**: Efficient streaming for large datasets
- **Error recovery**: Continues processing despite individual failures

### Optimization Features
- **Batch processing**: Groups related operations
- **Relationship mapping**: Maintains referential integrity
- **Conflict resolution**: Handles duplicate data gracefully
- **Progress reporting**: Real-time import status

## Known Limitations

### Minor Compatibility Gaps
- **Binary data encoding**: Some attachment formats need conversion
- **Specialized modules**: Process management, calendar system not yet supported
- **Custom modifications**: Site-specific OTRS customizations require manual review

### Workarounds Available
- **Missing tables**: Can be added via migration files
- **Data type mismatches**: Tool provides automatic conversion
- **Encoding issues**: UTF-8 conversion handles most cases

## Migration Best Practices

### Pre-Migration Checklist
1. **Backup existing GoatFlow database**
2. **Verify OTRS dump integrity** with analyze command
3. **Test with dry-run first** to identify potential issues
4. **Review confidentiality requirements** for sensitive data

### Migration Process
```bash
# 1. Clean database setup
make db-reset

# 2. Analyze the OTRS dump
./bin/goatflow-migrate -cmd=analyze -sql=otrs_production.sql

# 3. Test import (dry run)
./bin/goatflow-migrate -cmd=import -sql=otrs_production.sql -db="$DB_URL" -dry-run

# 4. Perform actual import
./bin/goatflow-migrate -cmd=import -sql=otrs_production.sql -db="$DB_URL"

# 5. Validate results
./bin/goatflow-migrate -cmd=validate -db="$DB_URL"
```

### Post-Migration Validation
1. **Core functionality**: Verify ticket creation, customer access, agent workflows
2. **Data integrity**: Check relationship consistency and foreign keys
3. **Advanced features**: Test system configuration, notifications, templates
4. **Security**: Verify user permissions and access controls

## Success Metrics

### Compatibility Achievement
- **✅ 100% core OTRS functionality** preserved
- **✅ 95%+ advanced feature compatibility** achieved
- **✅ Zero data loss** during migration
- **✅ Complete audit trail** maintained
- **✅ Production-grade reliability** demonstrated

### Technical Validation
- **✅ Real-world testing** with production OTRS database
- **✅ Confidential data handling** proven secure
- **✅ Large dataset performance** verified efficient
- **✅ Error handling robustness** confirmed resilient
- **✅ Schema evolution** demonstrated flexible

## Conclusion

The GoatFlow OTRS migration system provides enterprise-grade compatibility with existing OTRS installations, enabling organizations to migrate with confidence. The tool has been validated with real production data including confidential customer information, demonstrating both technical capability and security compliance.

**Migration confidence level: 95%+**  
**Recommended for production use: ✅ Yes**  
**Data security validated: ✅ Confirmed**  
**OTRS compatibility claims: ✅ Verified**

For technical support or migration assistance, refer to the GoatFlow documentation or contact the development team.

## Mounting an Existing OTRS Filesystem (Attachments)

GoatFlow now uses the OTRS filesystem layout for attachments:

- var/article/YYYY/MM/DD/<TicketID>/<ArticleID>/<filename>

This means you can bind-mount your existing OTRS attachment store and GoatFlow will read old attachments and write new ones in the same structure.

### Recommended docker-compose configuration

In `docker-compose.yml` for the backend service:

1) Keep a base storage mount for GoatFlow caches/thumbs

- ./storage:/app/storage:Z

2) Mount OTRS article tree at the correct path

- /opt/znuny/var/article:/app/storage/var/article:Z

3) Ensure runtime environment points to storage root

- STORAGE_PATH=/app/storage

Example snippet:

```yaml
services:
	backend:
		environment:
			STORAGE_PATH: /app/storage
		volumes:
			- ./storage:/app/storage:Z
			- /opt/znuny/var/article:/app/storage/var/article:Z
```

### Notes

- Read-only option: Use `:ro,Z` on the OTRS mount if you want GoatFlow to read from OTRS but not write to it.
- Full write compatibility: Use `:Z` to allow GoatFlow to write new attachments in OTRS format and location.
- Permissions: Containers run as UID 1000; ensure the host path allows read/write as needed. On SELinux systems, `:Z` is required (already included above).
- Alternate approach: If your host folder already contains `var/article` at its root, you can mount that folder directly at `/app/storage` instead of a nested mount. Be aware this will also store GoatFlow thumbnails under that host folder.
